[OCPNODE-747] New CRD ImageDigestMirrorSet and ImageTagMirrorSet to support AllowMirrByTags (#929)
openshift/enhancements: enhancements/api-review/add-new-CRD-ImageSourceDigestPolicy-and-ImageSourceTagPolicy-to-config.openshift.io.md

---
title: add-new-CRD-ImageSourceDigestPolicy-and-ImageSourceTagPolicy-to-config.openshift.io
authors:
  - "@QiWang19"
reviewers:
  - TBD
approvers:
  - TBD

> approvers:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
api-approvers:
   - @sttts 
```

since he's already here :)

  - TBD
  - "@oscardoe"
creation-date: 2021-03-10
last-updated: 2021-11-11
status: implementable
---

# Add CRD ImageSourceDigestPolicy and ImageSourceTagPolicy to config.openshift.io/v1

## Release Signoff Checklist

- [x] Enhancement is `implementable`
- [x] Design details are appropriately documented from clear requirements
- [x] Test plan is defined
- [ ] Operational readiness criteria is defined
- [ ] Graduation criteria for dev preview, tech preview, GA
- [ ] User-facing documentation is created in [openshift-docs](https://github.com/openshift/openshift-docs/)

## Summary

> Today, the ImageContentSourcePolicy(ICSP) object sets up mirror with `mirror-by-digest-only` property set to true. Requires images be pulled by digest only. This enhancement introduce new CRDs to config/v1:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Today, the ImageContentSourcePolicy (ICSP) object sets up mirror with `mirror-by-digest-only` property set to true. Requires images be pulled by digest only. This enhancement introduce new CRDs to config/v1:
```

Reviewer: Since you are declaring the acronym ICSP here, you can just use it throughout the enhancement instead of the full name.

- ImageSourceDigestPolicy: holds mirror configurations that are used to pull image from mirrors by digest specification only.
- ImageSourceTagPolicy: holds mirror configurations that allow pulling image from mirrors using tag specification.

## Motivation

### Motivation to add support allow mirror by tags

> - Today, the ImageContentSourcePolicy(ICSP) object sets up mirror configuration with `mirror-by-digest-only` property set to `true`, which leads to using mirrors only when images are referenced by digests. However, when working with disconnected environments, sometimes multiple ImageContentSourcePolicies are needed, some of them are used by apps/manifests that don't use digests when pulling the images.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Today, the ICSP object sets up mirror configuration with `mirror-by-digest-only` property set to `true`, which leads to using mirrors only when images are referenced by digests. However, when working with disconnected environments, sometimes multiple ImageContentSourcePolicies are needed, some of them are used by apps/manifests that don't use digests when pulling the images.
```

### Non-Goals

- This proposal does not recommend using by-tag references for OpenShift release images. Those should still be referenced by digest, regardless of whether `ImageSourceTagPolicy` is configured for repositories where the release images are mirrored

## Proposal

The New CRD `ImageSourceDigestPolicy` will be added to config.openshift.io/v1.
The schema of `ImageSourceDigestPolicy` is same as `ImageContentSourcePolicy`.

```go
// ImageSourceDigestPolicy is the specification of the ImageSourceDigestPolicy CRD.
type ImageSourceDigestPolicySpec struct {
	// repositoryDigestMirrors allows images referenced by image digests in pods to be
	// pulled from alternative mirrored repository locations. The image pull specification
	// provided to the pod will be compared to the source locations described in RepositoryDigestMirrors
	// and the image may be pulled down from any of the mirrors in the list instead of the
	// specified repository allowing administrators to choose a potentially faster mirror.
	// To pull image from mirrors using tag specification, should configure 

> 	// a list of mirrors using "ImageSourceDigestPolicy" CRD.

Reviewer 2: Typo:  Should reference `ImageSourceTagPolicy`

	// may impact the exact order mirrors are contacted in, or some mirrors may be contacted
	// in parallel, so this should be considered a preference rather than a guarantee of ordering.
	// "mirrors" ueses one of the following formats:
	// host[:port]
	// host[:port]/namespace[/namespace…]
	// host[:port]/namespace[/namespace…]/repo
	// for more information about the format, see the document about the location field:
	// https://github.com/containers/image/blob/main/docs/containers-registries.conf.5.md#choosing-a-registry-toml-table
	// +optional
	// +listType=set
	Mirrors []Mirror `json:"mirrors,omitempty"`
}

// +kubebuilder:validation:Pattern=`^((?:[a-zA-Z0-9]|[a-zA-Z0-9][a-zA-Z0-9-]*[a-zA-Z0-9])(?:(?:\.(?:[a-zA-Z0-9]|[a-zA-Z0-9][a-zA-Z0-9-]*[a-zA-Z0-9]))+)?(?::[0-9]+)?)(?:(?:/[a-z0-9]+(?:(?:(?:[._]|__|[-]*)[a-z0-9]+)+)?)+)?$`
type Mirror string
```

An example ImageSourceDigestPolicy file will look like:
```yaml
apiVersion: config.openshift.io/v1
kind: ImageSourceDigestPolicy
metadata:
  name: ubi8repo
spec:
  repositoryDigestMirrors: 
  - mirrors:
    - example.io/example/ubi-minimal
    source: registry.access.redhat.com/ubi8/ubi-minimal
```

> The ImageSourceDigestPolicy object will lead to the creattion of a drop-in file at `/etc/containers/registries.conf` by MCO that

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The ImageSourceDigestPolicy object will lead to the creation of a drop-in file at `/etc/containers/registries.conf` by MCO that
```
This is MCO but owned by ctrcfg controller, let's be specific here

	// may impact the exact order mirrors are contacted in, or some mirrors may be contacted
	// in parallel, so this should be considered a preference rather than a guarantee of ordering.
	// "mirrors" ueses one of the following formats:
	// host[:port]
	// host[:port]/namespace[/namespace…]
	// host[:port]/namespace[/namespace…]/repo
	// for more information about the format, see the document about the location field:
	// https://github.com/containers/image/blob/main/docs/containers-registries.conf.5.md#choosing-a-registry-toml-table
	// +optional
	// +listType=set
	Mirrors []Mirrors `json:"mirrors,omitempty"`
}

// +kubebuilder:validation:Pattern=`^((?:[a-zA-Z0-9]|[a-zA-Z0-9][a-zA-Z0-9-]*[a-zA-Z0-9])(?:(?:\.(?:[a-zA-Z0-9]|[a-zA-Z0-9][a-zA-Z0-9-]*[a-zA-Z0-9]))+)?(?::[0-9]+)?)(?:(?:/[a-z0-9]+(?:(?:(?:[._]|__|[-]*)[a-z0-9]+)+)?)+)?$`
type Mirror string
```

An example ImageSourceTagPolicy file will look like:
```yaml
apiVersion: config.openshift.io/v1
kind: ImageSourceTagPolicy
metadata:
  name: ubi8repo
spec:
  repositoryTagMirrors: 
  - mirrors:
    - example.io/example/ubi-minimal
    source: registry.access.redhat.com/ubi8/ubi-minimal
```

> The ImageSourceTagPolicy object will lead to the creattion of a drop-in file at `/etc/containers/registries.conf` by MCO that no

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The ImageSourceTagPolicy object will lead to the creation of a drop-in file at `/etc/containers/registries.conf` by MCO that no
```
same comment as above

digest only limitations on this mirrors.

> ### User Stories

Reviewer: @QiWang19 can you add a story for an existing user that wants to continue using old until deprecation?

Author: fixed

> #### As a user, I would like to pull images from mirror using tag, without digests reference

Reviewer: do you think we need to have 2 stories 1 for a new user with a new cluster and 1 for an existing user with an upgraded cluster both of whom want to use new crd?

(or at least clarify bit within this one?)

Author: I explained it in this user story.

The user need to define multiple mirror configurations, used by apps/manifests that don't use digests to pull
the images when working with disconnected environments or pulling from registries that act as transparent pull-through proxy cache.

The user can pull image without digest by configuring mirrors using `ImageSourceTagPolicy` CRD.

> And MCO will create the ImageSourceTagPolicy object. Once this is done, the images can be pulled from the mirrors without the digest referenced.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The MCO will create the ImageSourceTagPolicy object. Once this is done, the images can be pulled from the mirrors without the digest referenced.
```

### API Extensions
- Adds new CRD ImageSourceDigestPolicy to config.openshift.io/v1.
- Adds new CRD ImageSourceTagPolicy to config.openshift.io/v1
- Impacts on existing resources(The impacts are in the "Operational Aspects
of API Extensions" section)

>   - Components use ImageContentSourcePolicy should upgrade to use ImageSourceDigestPolicy.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  - Components currently using ImageContentSourcePolicy should upgrade to use ImageSourceDigestPolicy.
```

### Implementation Details/Notes/Constraints [optional]

Implementing this enhancement requires changes in:

> - [containers/images](https://github.com/containers/image): registries.conf needs change its mirror setting to make digest only configurable for mirrors registry, not for the main registry. This can be achieved by having a boolean for each mirror table, or having separated mirror lists: a list of mirrors that allow for tag specification,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- [containers/images](https://github.com/containers/image): registries.conf needs to change its mirror setting to make digests only configurable for mirrors registry, not for the main registry. This can be achieved by having a boolean for each mirror table, or having separated mirror lists: a list of mirrors that allow for tag specification,
```

and a list of mirrors require digest specification, or have different boolean value.
- [openshift/api/config/v1](https://github.com/openshift/api/tree/master/config/v1): definition the schema and API of the ImageSourceDigestPolicy and ImageSourceTagPolicy.
- [openshift/client-go](https://github.com/openshift/client-go), [openshift/cluster-config-operator](https://github.com/openshift/cluster-config-operator/pull/220): rebase the openshift/api version in these repositories to apply the new CRD
to the cluster.
- [openshift/runtime-utils/pkg/registries](https://github.com/openshift/runtime-utils/tree/master/pkg/registries): helper functions to edit registries.conf.

> - [openshift/machine-config-operator](https://github.com/openshift/machine-config-operator): MCO needs watch for the ImageSourceDigestPolicy and ImageSourceDigestPolicy.

Reviewer: If this reqs changes in ctrcfg controller let's be specific?

> Convets the existing ImageContenSourcePolicy objects to objects of new CRD.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Converts the existing ImageContenSourcePolicy objects to objects of new CRD.
```

- Available by default
- Backhaul SLI telemetry
- Document SLOs for the component
- Conduct load testing

#### Removing a deprecated feature

- A Jira card [OCPNODE-717](https://issues.redhat.com/browse/OCPNODE-717) was created to record the upgrade of ImageSourceDigestPolicy. The [repositories](https://docs.google.com/document/d/11FJPpIYAQLj5EcYiJtbi_bNkAcJa2hCLV63WvoDsrcQ/edit) currently rely on operator/v1alpha1 ImageContentSourcePolicy(ICSP) will be migrated to config/v1 ImageSourceDigestPolicy.

- The ImageContentSourcePolicy(ICSP) will follow the rules from [Deprecating an entire component](https://docs.openshift.com/container-platform/4.8/rest_api/understanding-api-support-tiers.html#deprecating-entire-component_understanding-api-tiers). The duration is
12 months or 3 releases from the announcement of deprecation, whichever is longer.  

### Upgrade / Downgrade Strategy

#### Upgrade Strategy

An existing cluster is required to make an upgrade to 4.10 in order to make use of the allow mirror by tags feature. Before the deprecation of ImageContentSourcePolicy, MCO needs to watch for both ImageContentSourcePolicy, and ImageSourceDigestPolicy and create objects.

> Tier 1 component `imagecontentsourcepolicy.operator.openshift.io/v1alpha1` will stay 12 months or 3 releases.

Reviewer: 12 months or 3 releases from when?

Author: https://github.com/openshift/enhancements/pull/929/files#diff-eebeb781f4d3603039f4db588d8bd2ad7f35467593652f558463bf1c10312a3aR324 from the announcement of deprecation, for now the release that is deprecating `imagecontentsourcepolicy` is not determined.

Reviewer: sounds good can you note it here for clarity? :+1:

  - [Cluster-config-operator](https://github.com/openshift/cluster-config-operator)
  - [Openshift-api-server](https://github.com/openshift/openshift-apiserver/blob/98786f917ffc7d3dc3b05893f405970b87a419b9/pkg/image/apiserver/registries/registries.go)
  - [Runtime utils](https://github.com/openshift/runtime-utils/blob/8b8348d80d1d1e7b6cf06fb009d5965e0b55baa2/pkg/registries/registries.go#L50)
  - [Openshift-controller-manager](https://github.com/openshift/openshift-controller-manager/blob/2a11f145ad7fcf3e92460800de1d13ba7fbb90b0/pkg/build/controller/build/build_controller.go#L20943)

The impacts should be measured and done by Node team. Planning target CY21Q4
Jira card  [OCPNODE-717](https://issues.redhat.com/browse/OCPNODE-717) will record the upgrade of ImageSourceDigestPolicy.

#### Failure Modes

Failure of applying new ImageSourceDigestPolicy and ImageSourceTagPolicy should not impact the cluster health.
If there are existing ImageSourceDigestPolicy, ImageSourceTagPolicy or ImageContenSourcePolicy objects, they
should continue to work.
OCP Node team is likely to be called upon in case of escalation with one of the failure modes.

#### Support Procedures

> If fail to apply new CRs, the condition of the object will be `Failed`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If the cluster fails to apply new CRs, the condition of the object will be `Failed`.
```

or something?

The newly added CRD will not be rolled out to the cluster.

> The machin-config-controller logs will show errors for debugging issues.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The machine-config-controller logs will show errors for debugging issues.
```

For example, the failure of json format, the corresponding error in the log is "could not encode registries Ignition",

> Possible Failure of getting different image if by using tags to pull image from mirrors since tags are dynamic and the mirror registry does not synchronize the images. Crio info level logs will show which mirror is used to pull image to help detact the problem.

Reviewer: Could you clarify this paragraph? It's a little unclear

add validation for the CRD. Even if we continue with operator.openshift.io, add validation to the field and add
ImageContentSourcePolicy(ICSP) to operator.openshift.io/v1 CRDs don't have ratcheting validation yet to cope with
that. So a new CRD should be created, and ImageContentSourcePolicy(ICSP) under operator.openshift.io/v1alpha1 will be removed.

### Goals

- Enable the user to pull images using digest only from mirrors configured through config.openshift.io/v1 API ImageSourceDigestPolicy.
- Enable the user to pull images using tags from mirrors configured through config.openshift.io/v1 API ImageSourceTagPolicy.

### Non-Goals

- This proposal does not recommend using by-tag references for OpenShift release images. Those should still be referenced by digest, regardless of whether `ImageSourceTagPolicy` is configured for repositories where the release images are mirrored

## Proposal

The New CRD `ImageSourceDigestPolicy` will be added to config.openshift.io/v1.
The schema of `ImageSourceDigestPolicy` is same as `ImageContentSourcePolicy`.

```go
// ImageSourceDigestPolicy is the specification of the ImageSourceDigestPolicy CRD.

> type ImageSourceDigestPolicySpec struct {

Author: We are not going to revisit having two CRs. Actually I had a previous [commit](https://github.com/openshift/enhancements/pull/929/commits/ebe0e14bb81099bdc5b70ac84b0b446aa36c078e) for a CR with `digestMirrors` and `tagMirrors` fields. But at the meeting last year with Clayton and Mrunal, it was suggested we need two CRs. The CR for digest only will be moved to group `config.openshift.io/v1`, its schema should be the same as ImageContentSoucePolicy.

> type ImageSourceDigestPolicySpec struct {

Author: > * Or is the “policy“ word used to make this a singular, consistently with other resource names? Even in that case, a “mirror set” would be more accurate.

The naming is open to discussion. The current naming is imitating the naming ImageContentSourcePolicy. I mirror set can be more straightforward and on target.

> type ImageSourceDigestPolicySpec struct {

Author: Updated the enhancement to use names as ImageDigestMirrorSet and ImageTagMirrorSet.

	// may impact the exact order mirrors are contacted in, or some mirrors may be contacted
	// in parallel, so this should be considered a preference rather than a guarantee of ordering.
	// "mirrors" ueses one of the following formats:
	// host[:port]
	// host[:port]/namespace[/namespace…]
	// host[:port]/namespace[/namespace…]/repo
	// for more information about the format, see the document about the location field:
	// https://github.com/containers/image/blob/main/docs/containers-registries.conf.5.md#choosing-a-registry-toml-table
	// +optional
	// +listType=set
	Mirrors []Mirror `json:"mirrors,omitempty"`
}

// +kubebuilder:validation:Pattern=`^((?:[a-zA-Z0-9]|[a-zA-Z0-9][a-zA-Z0-9-]*[a-zA-Z0-9])(?:(?:\.(?:[a-zA-Z0-9]|[a-zA-Z0-9][a-zA-Z0-9-]*[a-zA-Z0-9]))+)?(?::[0-9]+)?)(?:(?:/[a-z0-9]+(?:(?:(?:[._]|__|[-]*)[a-z0-9]+)+)?)+)?$`
type Mirror string
```

An example ImageSourceDigestPolicy file will look like:
```yaml
apiVersion: config.openshift.io/v1
kind: ImageSourceDigestPolicy
metadata:
  name: ubi8repo
spec:
  repositoryDigestMirrors: 
  - mirrors:
    - example.io/example/ubi-minimal
    source: registry.access.redhat.com/ubi8/ubi-minimal
```

> The ImageSourceDigestPolicy object will lead to the creation of a drop-in file at `/etc/containers/registries.conf` by MCO containerruntime controller that

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The ImageSourceDigestPolicy object will lead to the creation of a drop-in file at `/etc/containers/registries.conf` by MCO [Container Runtime Config Controller](https://github.com/openshift/machine-config-operator/tree/master/pkg/controller/container-runtime-config) that
```

	// host[:port]/namespace[/namespace…]/repo
	// for more information about the format, see the document about the location field:
	// https://github.com/containers/image/blob/main/docs/containers-registries.conf.5.md#choosing-a-registry-toml-table
	// +optional
	// +listType=set
	Mirrors []Mirrors `json:"mirrors,omitempty"`
}

// +kubebuilder:validation:Pattern=`^((?:[a-zA-Z0-9]|[a-zA-Z0-9][a-zA-Z0-9-]*[a-zA-Z0-9])(?:(?:\.(?:[a-zA-Z0-9]|[a-zA-Z0-9][a-zA-Z0-9-]*[a-zA-Z0-9]))+)?(?::[0-9]+)?)(?:(?:/[a-z0-9]+(?:(?:(?:[._]|__|[-]*)[a-z0-9]+)+)?)+)?$`
type Mirror string
```

An example ImageSourceTagPolicy file will look like:
```yaml
apiVersion: config.openshift.io/v1
kind: ImageSourceTagPolicy
metadata:
  name: ubi8repo
spec:
  repositoryTagMirrors: 
  - mirrors:
    - example.io/example/ubi-minimal
    source: registry.access.redhat.com/ubi8/ubi-minimal
```

The ImageSourceTagPolicy object will lead to the creation of a drop-in file at `/etc/containers/registries.conf` by MCO containerruntime controller that no
digest only limitations on this mirrors.

### User Stories

#### As a user, I would like to pull images from mirror using tag, without digest references

> The user need to define multiple mirror configurations, used by apps/manifests that don't use digests to pull

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The user will need to define multiple mirror configurations, used by apps/manifests that don't use digests to pull
```

Reviewer: done.

> the images when working with disconnected environments or pulling from registries that act as transparent pull-through proxy cache.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
the images when working with disconnected environments or pulling from registries that act as transparent pull-through proxy caches.
```

Reviewer: done

> For user on a cluster that alreay supports ImageSourceTagPolicy and ImageSourceDigestPolicy, the user can pull image without digest by configuring mirrors using `ImageSourceTagPolicy` CRD.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For users on a cluster that already supports ImageSourceTagPolicy and ImageSourceDigestPolicy, the user can pull images without digests by configuring mirrors using `ImageSourceTagPolicy` CRD.
```

Reviewer: done.

> For user upgraded to a cluster suppports `ImageSourceTagPolicy` CRD, if they had ICSP objects, the ICSP objects still take

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For users with upgraded clusters that support `ImageSourceTagPolicy` CRD, if they had ICSP objects, the ICSP objects still take
```

> effect. The user need to configure mirrors using `ImageSourceTagPolicy` CRD on the upgraded cluster to use tags.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
effect. The user will need to configure mirrors using `ImageSourceTagPolicy` CRD on the upgraded cluster to use tags.
```

Reviewer: done

The MCO will create the ImageSourceTagPolicy object. Once this is done, the images can be pulled from the mirrors without the digest referenced.

#### As a user using ICSP, I would like to use ICSP pull images using digest by default from mirrors

> The user can still define ICSP CR before its deprecation. After the deprecation of ICSP, the uset need to use

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The user can still define ICSP CR before its deprecation. After the deprecation of ICSP, the user will need to use
```

Reviewer: I can't close comments, but this is done.

`ImageSourceDigestPolicy` for digest pull specification requirement.

### API Extensions
- Adds new CRD ImageSourceDigestPolicy to config.openshift.io/v1.
- Adds new CRD ImageSourceTagPolicy to config.openshift.io/v1
- Impacts on existing resources(The impacts are in the "Operational Aspects
of API Extensions" section)

>   - Components currently using ImageContentSourcePolicy should upgrade to use ImageSourceDigestPolicy.

Reviewer: can you double chck the spacing on this "-" it is nested under the prev bullet, is that correct?

Author: Yes, it's correct

and a list of mirrors require digest specification, or have different boolean value.
- [openshift/api/config/v1](https://github.com/openshift/api/tree/master/config/v1): definition the schema and API of the ImageSourceDigestPolicy and ImageSourceTagPolicy.
- [openshift/client-go](https://github.com/openshift/client-go), [openshift/cluster-config-operator](https://github.com/openshift/cluster-config-operator/pull/220): rebase the openshift/api version in these repositories to apply the new CRD
to the cluster.
- [openshift/runtime-utils/pkg/registries](https://github.com/openshift/runtime-utils/tree/master/pkg/registries): helper functions to edit registries.conf.
- [openshift/machine-config-operator](https://github.com/openshift/machine-config-operator): MCO needs watch for the ImageSourceDigestPolicy and ImageSourceDigestPolicy. The machine-config-operator/pkg/controller/container-runtime-config controller needs to operate the ImageSourceDigestPolicy and ImageSourceDigestPolicy CRDs.
Converts the existing ImageContenSourcePolicy objects to objects of new CRD.

> - This [document](https://docs.google.com/document/d/11FJPpIYAQLj5EcYiJtbi_bNkAcJa2hCLV63WvoDsrcQ/edit?usp=sharing) keeps a list of components that use operator.openshift.io/v1alpha1 ImageContentSourcePolicy. Need to change those repositories to upgrade to ImageSourceDigestPolicy.

Author: Add a note for using centralized code in this section for future implementation.

#### Notes

1. During the upgrade path, MCO can watch for both old CR ImageContentSourcePolicy and new CRs and create objects.

2. The merge order of mirrors for the same source is deterministic by topological sorting:<br/>
Order is preserving the relative order of the mirrors using topological sorting. A graph is formed using each mirror as a
vertex, adding an unidirectional edge between adjacent mirrors from the same mirror list. If the graph is cyclic graph, the topological sort will start
from the first vertex after the alphabetical sorting of the vertces. If multiple verteces is from the same vertex, they will be
visited in alphabetical order.

> 3. The ImageStream has not supported pulling using tags yet. It has started working on this feature.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
3. The ImageStream does not supported pulling using tags yet, however, work has started on this feature.
```

### Risks and Mitigations

> Pulling images from mirror registries without the digest specifications could lead to returning different image version from different registry if the image tag mapping is out of sync. But the OpenShift core required image using digests to avoid different versions won't consume this feature at all, so it is not exposed to the risks that anyone who actually uses the feature will be exposed to.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For users that opt into using this feature, pulling images from mirror registries without the digest specifications could lead to returning different image version from different registry if the image tag mapping is out of sync. However, OpenShift core is not exposed to this risk because it requires images using digests to avoid skew and won't consume this feature at all.  
```

## Design Details

### Test Plan

Update the tests that are currently in the MCO to verify that registries.conf
requires digest specification for mirrors configured through ImageSourceDigestPolicy.

> Update the tests that are currently in the MCO to verify that registries.conf does not

Reviewer: Can you point me to these tests?

Author: The generated registry.conf  should be verified to not have restrictions about using tags with mirror
https://github.com/openshift/machine-config-operator/blob/3cc546103bc9042d899c34ada12e429b86aa6547/pkg/controller/container-runtime-config/container_runtime_config_controller_test.go#L583

Reviewer: Thanks! Let's specific the container runtime config controller unit tests will be updated then.

require digest specification for mirrors configured through ImageSourceTagPolicy.

### Graduation Criteria

> GA in openshift will be looked at to

Author: Just leave GA here?

> GA in openshift will be looked at to

Reviewer: How many phases is this going thru? Just tech preview then GA right?

determine graduation.

#### Dev Preview -> Tech Preview

> - Ability to utilize the enhancement end to end

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Ability to utilize the enhancement end to end and verify that there are no regressions
```
or something like that. ;)

- Gather feedback from users rather than just developers
- Enumerate service level indicators (SLIs), expose SLIs as metrics
- Write symptoms-based alerts for the component(s)

#### Tech Preview -> GA

- More testing (upgrade, downgrade, scale)
- Sufficient time for feedback
- Available by default
- Backhaul SLI telemetry
- Document SLOs for the component
- Conduct load testing

#### Removing a deprecated feature

- A Jira card [OCPNODE-717](https://issues.redhat.com/browse/OCPNODE-717) was created to record the upgrade of ImageSourceDigestPolicy. The [repositories](https://docs.google.com/document/d/11FJPpIYAQLj5EcYiJtbi_bNkAcJa2hCLV63WvoDsrcQ/edit) currently rely on operator/v1alpha1 ImageContentSourcePolicy(ICSP) will be migrated to config/v1 ImageSourceDigestPolicy.

- The ImageContentSourcePolicy(ICSP) will follow the rules from [Deprecating an entire component](https://docs.openshift.com/container-platform/4.8/rest_api/understanding-api-support-tiers.html#deprecating-entire-component_understanding-api-tiers). The duration is
12 months or 3 releases from the announcement of deprecation, whichever is longer.  

### Upgrade / Downgrade Strategy

#### Upgrade Strategy

> An existing cluster is required to make an upgrade to 4.10 in order to make use of the allow mirror by tags feature. Before the deprecation of ImageContentSourcePolicy, MCO needs to watch for both ImageContentSourcePolicy, and ImageSourceDigestPolicy and create objects.

Reviewer: is 4.10 correct since this enhancement isn't yet approved?

Author: no, it changed from 4.9 to 4.10, now it's 4.11

Tier 1 component `imagecontentsourcepolicy.operator.openshift.io/v1alpha1` will stay 12 months or 3 releases from the announcement of deprecation.
During the development on the release that one release ahead of deprecating `imagecontentsourcepolicy.operator.openshift.io/v1alpha1`,
MCO will copy existing ImageContentSourcePolicy objects to ImageSourceDigestPolicy and create new objects, and delete the
ImageContentSourcePolicy objects. If any errors appear during the process, MCO should report `Upgradeable=False`.

> On the release ImageContentSourcePolicy CRD should be removed from the API, MCO will degrade if MCO still finds objects of

Reviewer: ```suggestion
On the release that the  ImageContentSourcePolicy CRD is removed from the API, the MCO will degrade if it still finds objects of
```

ImageContentSourcePolicy. MCO should report the ImageContentSourcePolicy is orphaned, let the user know they should create new objects
using CRD ImageSourceDigestPolicy or ImageSourceTagPolicy.

#### Downgrade Strategy
According to [Deprecating an entire component](https://docs.openshift.com/container-platform/4.8/rest_api/understanding-api-support-tiers.html#deprecating-entire-component_understanding-api-tiers), Tier 1 component
`imagecontentsourcepolicy.operator.openshift.io/v1alpha1` will stay 12 months or 3 releases from the announcement of deprecation, whichever is longer. During the upgrade path,

> if an 4.10 upgrade fails mid-way through, or if the 4.10 cluster is

Reviewer: same q about release

#### Failure Modes

Failure of applying new ImageSourceDigestPolicy and ImageSourceTagPolicy should not impact the cluster health.
If there are existing ImageSourceDigestPolicy, ImageSourceTagPolicy or ImageContenSourcePolicy objects, they
should continue to work.
OCP Node team is likely to be called upon in case of escalation with one of the failure modes.

#### Support Procedures

If the cluster fails to apply new CRs, the condition of the object will be `Failed`.
The newly added CRD will not be rolled out to the cluster.
The machine-config-controller logs will show errors for debugging issues.
For example, the failure of json format, the corresponding error in the log is "could not encode registries Ignition",

Failure can caused by getting unexpected image when using tag pull specification when the mirror registry does not synchronize the images. Crio info level logs will show which mirror is used to pull image to help debug the problem.

## Implementation History

- [openshift/api#874: Create ImageContentPolicy CRD to config/v1 and allowMirrorByTags support](https://github.com/openshift/api/pull/874) PR was merged.

> ## Drawbacks

Reviewer: any drawbacks or alternatives? if no add a n/a

Author: I linked it to Risks and Mitigations section.

	// host[:port]/namespace[/namespace…]
	// host[:port]/namespace[/namespace…]/repo
	// for more information about the format, see the document about the location field:
	// https://github.com/containers/image/blob/main/docs/containers-registries.conf.5.md#choosing-a-registry-toml-table
	// +optional
	// +listType=set
	Mirrors []Mirror `json:"mirrors,omitempty"`
}

// +kubebuilder:validation:Pattern=`^((?:[a-zA-Z0-9]|[a-zA-Z0-9][a-zA-Z0-9-]*[a-zA-Z0-9])(?:(?:\.(?:[a-zA-Z0-9]|[a-zA-Z0-9][a-zA-Z0-9-]*[a-zA-Z0-9]))+)?(?::[0-9]+)?)(?:(?:/[a-z0-9]+(?:(?:(?:[._]|__|[-]*)[a-z0-9]+)+)?)+)?$`
type Mirror string
```

An example ImageSourceDigestPolicy file will look like:
```yaml
apiVersion: config.openshift.io/v1
kind: ImageSourceDigestPolicy
metadata:
  name: ubi8repo
spec:
  repositoryDigestMirrors: 
  - mirrors:
    - example.io/example/ubi-minimal
    source: registry.access.redhat.com/ubi8/ubi-minimal
```

The ImageSourceDigestPolicy object will lead to the creation of a drop-in file at `/etc/containers/registries.conf` by MCO [Container Runtime Config Controller](https://github.com/openshift/machine-config-operator/tree/master/pkg/controller/container-runtime-config) controller that

> limits the usage of mirrors is by digest only.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
limits the usage of configured mirrors to image pulls by digest only.
```

	// may impact the exact order mirrors are contacted in, or some mirrors may be contacted
	// in parallel, so this should be considered a preference rather than a guarantee of ordering.
	// "mirrors" ueses one of the following formats:
	// host[:port]
	// host[:port]/namespace[/namespace…]
	// host[:port]/namespace[/namespace…]/repo
	// for more information about the format, see the document about the location field:
	// https://github.com/containers/image/blob/main/docs/containers-registries.conf.5.md#choosing-a-registry-toml-table
	// +optional
	// +listType=set
	Mirrors []Mirrors `json:"mirrors,omitempty"`
}

// +kubebuilder:validation:Pattern=`^((?:[a-zA-Z0-9]|[a-zA-Z0-9][a-zA-Z0-9-]*[a-zA-Z0-9])(?:(?:\.(?:[a-zA-Z0-9]|[a-zA-Z0-9][a-zA-Z0-9-]*[a-zA-Z0-9]))+)?(?::[0-9]+)?)(?:(?:/[a-z0-9]+(?:(?:(?:[._]|__|[-]*)[a-z0-9]+)+)?)+)?$`
type Mirror string
```

An example ImageSourceTagPolicy file will look like:
```yaml
apiVersion: config.openshift.io/v1
kind: ImageSourceTagPolicy
metadata:
  name: ubi8repo
spec:
  repositoryTagMirrors: 
  - mirrors:
    - example.io/example/ubi-minimal
    source: registry.access.redhat.com/ubi8/ubi-minimal
```

> The ImageSourceTagPolicy object will lead to the creation of a drop-in file at `/etc/containers/registries.conf` by MCO containerruntime controller that no

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The ImageSourceTagPolicy object will lead to the creation of a drop-in file at `/etc/containers/registries.conf` by MCO containerruntime controller that there are no
```

> digest only limitations on this mirrors.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
digest only limitations on the specified mirrors, allowing images to be pulled using tags.
```

### User Stories

#### As a user, I would like to pull images from mirror using tag, without digest references

The user will need to define multiple mirror configurations, used by apps/manifests that don't use digests to pull
the images when working with disconnected environments or pulling from registries that act as transparent pull-through proxy caches.

For users on a cluster that already supports ImageSourceTagPolicy and ImageSourceDigestPolicy, the user can pull images without digests by configuring mirrors using `ImageSourceTagPolicy` CRD.

> For users with upgraded to a clusters that suppports `ImageSourceTagPolicy` CRD, if they had ICSP objects, the ICSP objects still take

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For users with upgraded clusters that support the `ImageSourceTagPolicy` CRD, if they had ICSP objects, the ICSP objects still take
```

Converts the existing ImageContenSourcePolicy objects to objects of new CRD.
- This [document](https://docs.google.com/document/d/11FJPpIYAQLj5EcYiJtbi_bNkAcJa2hCLV63WvoDsrcQ/edit?usp=sharing) keeps a list of components that use operator.openshift.io/v1alpha1 ImageContentSourcePolicy. Need to change those repositories to upgrade to ImageSourceDigestPolicy.

#### Notes

1. During the upgrade path, MCO can watch for both old CR ImageContentSourcePolicy and new CRs and create objects.

2. The merge order of mirrors for the same source is deterministic by topological sorting:<br/>
Order is preserving the relative order of the mirrors using topological sorting. A graph is formed using each mirror as a
vertex, adding an unidirectional edge between adjacent mirrors from the same mirror list. If the graph is cyclic graph, the topological sort will start
from the first vertex after the alphabetical sorting of the vertces. If multiple verteces is from the same vertex, they will be
visited in alphabetical order.

3. The ImageStream does not supported pulling using tags yet, however, work has started on this feature.

### Risks and Mitigations

> For users that opt into using this feature, pulling images from mirror registries without the digest specifications could lead to returning different image version from different registry if the image tag mapping is out of sync. However, OpenShift core is not exposed to this risk because it requires

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For users that opt into using this feature, pulling images from mirror registries without the digest specifications could lead to returning a different image version from a different registry if the image tag mapping is out of sync. However, OpenShift core is not exposed to this risk because it requires
```

> images using digests to avoid skew and won't consume this feature at all..

Reviewer: ```suggestion
images using digests to avoid skew and won't consume this feature at all.
```
(minor)

- The ImageContentSourcePolicy(ICSP) will follow the rules from [Deprecating an entire component](https://docs.openshift.com/container-platform/4.8/rest_api/understanding-api-support-tiers.html#deprecating-entire-component_understanding-api-tiers). The duration is
12 months or 3 releases from the announcement of deprecation, whichever is longer.  

### Upgrade / Downgrade Strategy

#### Upgrade Strategy

An existing cluster is required to make an upgrade to 4.11 in order to make use of the allow mirror by tags feature. Before the deprecation of ImageContentSourcePolicy, MCO needs to watch for both ImageContentSourcePolicy, and ImageSourceDigestPolicy and create objects.

Tier 1 component `imagecontentsourcepolicy.operator.openshift.io/v1alpha1` will stay 12 months or 3 releases from the announcement of deprecation.
During the development on the release that one release ahead of deprecating `imagecontentsourcepolicy.operator.openshift.io/v1alpha1`,
MCO will copy existing ImageContentSourcePolicy objects to ImageSourceDigestPolicy and create new objects, and delete the
ImageContentSourcePolicy objects. If any errors appear during the process, MCO should report `Upgradeable=False`.

> On the release that the ImageContentSourcePolicy CRD is removed from the API, the MCO will degrade if it still finds objects of

Reviewer: ```suggestion
On the release that the ImageContentSourcePolicy CRD is removed from the API, the MCO will update its clusteroperator object to reflect a degraded state if it still finds objects of
```

> ImageContentSourcePolicy. MCO should report the ImageContentSourcePolicy is orphaned, let the user know they should create new objects

Reviewer: ```suggestion
ImageContentSourcePolicy. The MCO should report that the ImageContentSourcePolicy is orphaned and let the user know they should create new objects
```

> using CRD ImageSourceDigestPolicy or ImageSourceTagPolicy.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
using the new ImageSourceDigestPolicy or ImageSourceTagPolicy CRDs.
```

	// +optional
	// +listType=atomic
	RepositoryTagMirrors []RepositoryTagMirrors `json:"repositoryTagMirrors"`
}

// RepositoryTagMirrors holds cluster-wide information about how to handle mirrors in the registries config.
type RepositoryTagMirrors struct {
	// source matches the repository that users refer to, e.g. in image pull specifications.
	// "source" ueses one of the following formats:
	// host[:port]
	// host[:port]/namespace[/namespace…]
	// host[:port]/namespace[/namespace…]/repo
	// [*.]host
	// for more information about the format, see the document about the location field:
	// https://github.com/containers/image/blob/main/docs/containers-registries.conf.5.md#choosing-a-registry-toml-table
	// +required
	// +kubebuilder:validation:Required
	// +kubebuilder:validation:Pattern=`^\*(?:\.(?:[a-zA-Z0-9]|[a-zA-Z0-9][a-zA-Z0-9-]*[a-zA-Z0-9]))+$|^((?:[a-zA-Z0-9]|[a-zA-Z0-9][a-zA-Z0-9-]*[a-zA-Z0-9])(?:(?:\.(?:[a-zA-Z0-9]|[a-zA-Z0-9][a-zA-Z0-9-]*[a-zA-Z0-9]))+)?(?::[0-9]+)?)(?:(?:/[a-z0-9]+(?:(?:(?:[._]|__|[-]*)[a-z0-9]+)+)?)+)?$`
	Source string `json:"source"`
	// mirrors is zero or more locations that may also contain the same images.

> 	// Images can be pulled from these mirrors only if they are referenced by their digests.

Reviewer 3: Presumably
```suggestion
	// Images can be pulled from these mirrors only if they are referenced by their tags.
```
